Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by two guests. The first one is Doctor
Brian La, a returned guest. I'm leaving the link
to our first interview in the description of this
one is the Carl N Le in Professor of
Jurisprudence at the University of Chicago. And I also
have together with me today, Doctor Jimmie Edwards is
a lecturer in law at the University of Chicago
where he teaches political philosophy and they are both
authors of Marx, a new book. So, Doctors Lather
and Edwards. Welcome to the show. It's a pleasure
to everyone.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. It's great to be back.
So I think I will start with Doctor Edward
Zer. I would like to ask you just to
start off with a broad question about Marx. Uh
Marx's background. Tell us a little bit about his
personal life. I mean, at least the aspects of
it that you think are the most relevant for
us to then get into uh his main political,
his main ideas and theories. Yeah.
Good. And thanks. Uh Marx had a bit of
an interesting life in contrast to many philosophers. So
um there, there is quite a lot to that
we could say, but um I'll keep it short
for now. So he was born in 1818 in
Trier, Germany, which is in the western side of
Germany. Uh That's relevant because it was shortly after
um uh Napoleon had um uh lost power, but
the region was still very much influenced by Napoleonic
ideas more so than the sort of conservative ideas
coming from Berlin. Uh Mars, uh he was um
raised in a Jewish family, not practicing and his
father converted to pro um protestantism um in order
to secure um continue working as a, as a
lawyer. Um Marx was uh studied for law for
a bit at Bonn for a year, um was
a bit of a rebellious student, caused some trouble
and um they decided it would be better to
send him a little further away. So he went
to Berlin um to continue his education and it's
there that he um fell under the intellectual influence
of Hegel um who had uh passed away shortly
before. Um BUT whose ideas were still very much
in the air, uh especially he came under the
influence of what we call left Hegelian with the
young hegelian, a group of, of liberal hegelian who
wanted to reject Hegel's uh conservative aspects, his, the
religious aspects of his thinking. Um um And so
they, and while preserving something of what they took
to be core to Hegel's ideas. Um And uh
especially there was Bruno Bauer who Marx came to
work with. Um AND Bauer supervised Marx's dissertation, uh
which was in ancient philosophy interestingly enough. Um But
by the time Marx had completed his phd under
Bauer Bauer um had moved uh to bond, but
that yet there was a reactionary um uh spirit
in the air and it was clear that Bauer
was not going to have a position for much
longer. And Marx would never um have a position
in the academy. It's at that point um while
he's out there um that he um becomes an
editor of a newspaper um in cologne. And he's,
some of his academic ideas are um coming through,
you know, i in this writing, but he's, he's
concerned primarily with a very real world events as
they're unfolding. And so this is, is kind of
a, an important early time for Marx is it's
merging a bit of his intellectual influence with seeing
these things play out in practice. Um Marx went
to uh Paris uh as a, as an expat
as that as the uh the newspaper was finally
coming to a close um and he was joined
there by a number of other German expats. Um
And it was also there that he met Frederick
Engels, um who, you know, would have famously a
lasting impact on his, uh you know, a friendship,
but a mentor they, uh uh Marx would be
a bit of a mentor to angles. Angles would
be a bit of a financial um uh benefactor
to Marx. Um But they would have a, they
would have a long career working together and it
was there that Marx really started to reject this,
this sort of young hegelian ideas, we can get
into, you know, the content of that later. Um
But it's in this period that uh that Marx
Marx is writing the things that we come to
now think of as very early uh Marx writings.
Um And he's developing very early there, his theory
of historical materialism, which we'll talk about, of course
and um and et cetera. So, um you know,
wrap that up, he um is forced to flee.
The Paris goes to Belgium for a time. Uh
What years
are these, Jamie? You throw the years.
This is, you know, 1844 1845 1846 in this
period. Um But the German authorities are, are putting
pressure on the Parisians to get rid of Marx.
And so he goes to a time to Brussels.
Um There's a moment here, very important uh a
revolutionary moment in 1848 now widely considered a failed
revolutionary moment, but there were uprisings across Europe. It
was a very promising moment and it's in, it's
in this period that Marx and Engels um released
the Communist Manifesto. Um Marx moved back to Germany
for a time. But quickly the 1848 revolution fails
mostly across Europe and Marx together with a lot
of the, that era that that generation of revolutionaries
um moved to London, which was open to refugees
at that point. And Marx moves what he thinks
is gonna be a temporary uh for a temporary
um stay. And he ends up spending the rest
of his life in London um involved variously in
political movements, some journalistic efforts. Uh BUT, but mostly
retreating to the um library to, to work on
capital and, and think about and think through these
issues. So that's a, that's a rough sketch. Um
I we can fill in any details but rough
outline. Um BUT he doesn't sustain much fame in
his life um guess moments. Um BUT lives into
the 18 eighties um and he passes away in
1883 having finished capital, but leaving a lot of
manuscripts behind um for angles to sort through which
becomes capitals two and three. But that's roughly the
rough sketch of how life goes,
right? And as I mentioned, we're going to get
into some of his main ideas and he was
very prolific and he also wrote about many different
topics so as an intellectual and because he mainly
started as a philosopher, but then went through topics
as diverse as economics, history, politics, social theory. How
would you classify him as an intellectual?
Yeah, I I would classify him as all of
those things, II, I think this is very important
to him. So, so he um there's three well
known influences, one might say on Marx, the, the
Hegelian background, um the sort of Parisian socialist movements
that he's exposed to increasingly in Paris. Um And
then the economic writings of Smith uh Ricardo, these
figures which influence him. And I think he bears
the mark of all of this. Really. I, I
um he certainly leaves behind what he thinks is
this, you know, purely scholastic um uh excursions that,
you know, the hegelian he felt were taking. Um
BUT he doesn't abandon philosophy. I mean, it, it's
uh it, it informs his thing. So I think
he's all of those things. I, I don't know
Brian, what you would say, but I think he's
a journalist, a philosopher, a social critic and economist.
And
yeah, I mean, I guess what I would add
is I, I think his conception of philosophy changes
very substantially. Um That is, you know, I mean,
my, my way of thinking about it is he
becomes a kind of philosophical naturalist that is he
doesn't think philosophy is kind of has the synthetic
enterprise of bringing together all the different empirical sciences,
speaking very broadly, history among these empirical sciences. Um
And you know, the idea that there's some special
philosophical method as hegel thought, right? Um That is,
you know, distinctive of philosophy. He, he abandons that.
So in that sense is uh you know, uh
his approach um is familiar from developments even in
20th century um philosophy, he does not think of
philosophical reflection is somehow methodologically distinct from other ways
of understanding how the world actually works, which is
why you have to know some economics and history,
um some politics and, and so on.
So let's get into historical materialism. And then you
mentioned very briefly that Doctor LA that uh you
rejected some of Eagle's ideas. So what, what aspects
of Eagle's idealism did he reject? And what were
the main ideas of Eagle's uh theory of history
that Marx retained?
Yeah. So, um uh you know, it's, it's natural
and appropriate to think of Marx's own theory of
historical change, the theory of historical materialism as being
developed as a reaction against um Hagel. Um The,
the irony is he actually takes over a lot
of Hagel's view. Um You see Hagel's view and
you get it in the phenomenology of Spirit. You
see it in the lectures that are collected in
English under the title Reason um in, in History.
Um Marx agrees with um Hagel that history has
a teleological structure, it's end directed, it's evolving in
a very particular direction. Um He shares with uh
Hagel the view that history has um a dialectical
structure though Marx was not a dialectical materialist, but
that's a separate matter that was a later um
sort of vulgarization of Marx. But he, he accepts
that history is dialectical in the sense that um
each historical epic uh is characterized by certain contradictions.
Um AND the resolution of those contradictions is what
sort of propels us forward into the, into the
next stage of history. And I, I'll come back
to that because this is where there's a very
important difference between Marx and Hagel. Um Marx also
agrees with Hagel that history is cunning um in
the sense that particular historical actors act for their
own reasons and motives without necessarily understanding the way
in which they're contributing to um a historical development
that has a certain structure to it. You know,
the big difference is that Marx is a materialist
and Hagel is an idealist, right, more precisely. Um
Hagel thinks that the contradictions in each historical epic
that are significant are contradictions at the level of
ideas, philosophical, religious, moral, economic ideas um that embed
within them certain contradictory elements, right? And so the
phenomenology of the, of spirit, Hagel's phenomenology of spirit
is the history of these contradictions in different domains
of human spirit, human thought, right? And how their
con the resolution of those contradictions leads to um
to the next stage. This is what Marx rejects
entirely, right? For Marx, the ideas, the Geist, the
spirit of the Age um uh is largely epiphenomenal,
right? That what really matters is um the material
stuff. Now, the question is what's meant by the
materialism and historical materialism. Um FOR Marx, the the
crucial fact about each historical epic is the level
of development of its productive power. OK. And history
is the history of growth and productive power, which
in turn then is responsible for changes in other
aspects of uh society and human consciousness. Um Some
elements of productive power are relatively stable, right? I
mean, human beings today are bigger than human beings
a couple of 1000 years ago, but our physical
strength hasn't increased significantly. Um Our knowledge has certainly
increased a great deal. But what matters about the
growth in knowledge is that um it affects the
growth in technology. And I'm gonna just use technology
very broadly to mean everything, you know, from simple
tools to computers, to the power loom, to the
steam engine, right? All of this, I'm gonna just
treat his technology. Um So Marx's account of historical
change is material in the sense that he thinks
it's changes in technology growth in technology, growth in
productive power. Um That explains the other changes that
we see in um in society and the contradictions
for Marx. And now, um here, contradiction from Marx
is not being used in quite the strict sense,
it was being used in Hagel. That is when
Hagel is talking about ideas, he really identifies or
claims to find, you know, fundamental logical inconsistencies in
uh in earlier philosophical systems, all of which of
course are resolved by um Hagel, which is why
history ends with Hagel. Uh DIDN'T quite work out
that way. But that's how Hagel thought um the
contradictions for Marx um are contradictions um between what
he calls the forces of production. That's technology. Let
me just gloss that as a technology and what
he calls the relations of production, right? And you
can think of the relations of production and it's,
it's more complicated than this for reasons we talk
about in, in the book. But you think of
the relations of production roughly as the distribution of
property rights in any particular society, right? Um WHO
has property in uh who owns technology, who owns
only their own labor power, most of us own
only our, our own labor power, right? Um And
uh but in every society, some people also own
the available technology, right? That that exists, right? So
um a contradiction for Marx occurs according to the
theory of historical materialism. When the existing relations of
production, the existing distribution of property rights is incompatible
with the maximum effective use of the existing technologies,
right? That's what he means by a contradiction. OK.
So it's not strictly a logical contradiction at all.
And when that occurs, Marx thinks we enter a
period of historical transformation. Um So let me just
give you a simple example. It's um it's not
exactly a historically accurate example in the sense that
it's running roughshod over long periods of time. But,
but think of it this way. Um OK, suppose
the technology is developed for the power loom right
now, the power loom, if you can get people
to work on, it can outproduce individual weavers of
fabrics, you know, by orders of magnitude. Ok? But
if you're the owner of a power loom, right,
you need peop, you need people available to work
on it. Right? And under feudalism, right? Which precedes
capitalism and the feudalism, capitalism transition was Marx's main
focus as a historical example, under feudalism. Right? You've
got serfs who are stuck on the feudal estates,
right? Who work for the feudal lord. Ok? You've
got journeymen who are sort of under the control
of these guild masters, right? And while they can
earn some money, they, they, they have very limited,
they don't have market flexibility and what the owner
of the power lo needs, right? Is people who
can sell their labor, power to the power loom
owner and work on the power loom in order
to produce massive amounts of fabrics. Ok? Um That
gives the owner of the power loom an incentive
to try to change the economic relations in their
society, right? Um And you'll notice that on this
story, the motivation for changing the relations of production
is a fairly simple economic motivation, right? I've got
my power loom. I've got nobody to work on
it again. I'm oversimplifying enormously, but I've got my
power loom. I've got nobody available to work on
it, right. This is no good. I need to
get the serfs of the feudal estate. I need
to break the control that the guild masters have
over these journeymen, right? So that I can get
them into my factory to, to run my, my
power lo all right. And that's gonna require changes
in laws. It's gonna require changing where people are,
right. Serfs are gonna have to get off the
feudal estates and into the urban centers where the
factory is and so on. And this then precipitates
a historical uh moment of, you know, conflict between
classes, right? The feudal lords are now in conflict
with the new owners of power looms, all right.
Um The serfs see the potential of getting off
the lousy feudal estate and into the city which
looks more attractive and they could have some more
money, you know, they could actually have income, right,
which they couldn't have on the feudal estate. Um
And so we enter a period of uh conflict
which will ultimately result in a fundamental transformation of
the relations of production in society and in Marxist
telling give birth to capitalism.
So I, I have to ask you is historical
materialism true. I mean, what sort of evidence do
we have to tell us whether it's true or
not?
Ok. Well, so a couple of things to say
about that. Um The first thing is that, um
you know, contrary to sort of simple minded critics
of Marx like Carl Popper, right? Um Historical materialism
does actually make falsifiable predictions. OK? Um And uh
and the thing we know about historical materialism as
a theory of historical change, um is that its
predictions aren't always borne out, right? Um That sometimes
we have, for example, regress in productive power rather
than growth in productive power, you know. Um SO,
but that's, that's well known. Second thing to say,
of course is that um every grand theory of
history um fails Brodell theory of history fails Vico
certainly fails Hegel, certainly fails, right? That is, it
can't account or explain for certain phenomena, you know.
Um However, historical materialism is probably the best of
the bunch. Um That is uh it has attracted
the interest of historians as a general framework for
the analysis of historical events um and turned out
to be extremely productive in explaining an awful lot
of um historical transformation. But like every theory in
the human sciences, um you know, uh there are
exceptions to its generalizations that the theory really can't
um can't deal with. Um YOU know, as I
like to say, historical materialism has a very simple
explanation for why the Soviet Union collapsed, right? Which
is that um the Soviet Union involved relations of
production, mainly centralized planning, right? That were totally inadequate
to maximize the effective use of the existing technologies,
right? So the Soviet Union was outproduced by the
capitalist world, right? Um And lo and behold it
collapsed, right? I mean, it does strangely enough fit
very nicely with, with the historical materialist view. But
you know, the there's an enormous loosely speaking Marxist
historiography that pays attention to economic classes in conflict
with each other, right in conflict because one class
can make better use of technology than another, but
the other class, they have to change property relations
in order to do that. Um And this turns
out to be very, very illuminating about many uh
historical events. Uh So I think that's what we
can say on behalf of the, the importance of
the theory of the grand theories of history. It's
actually the most successful one, like all grand theories
of history, it fails to explain certain historical events.
And so one of the biggest themes in Marxism
has to do with class and class conflict. So
what is the class according to Marx? And how
do classes develop?
Yeah, this is good. I I and, and we've
already touched on some of this, you know, in,
in answer to the last question, I was kind
of pre suppose there's classes. So this is gonna
be crucial for Marx, right? He says the history
of the world is the history of class conflict.
So, so under this is the dynamic that's going
to um move along the the the schema of
historical materialism, so to speak, um Marx given its
centrality, we might of course hope that Marx, that
Marx is going to give us a necessary and
sufficient conditions, et cetera, which he does not do.
Um And so, so we aren't what he's going
to propose is that um history situates people into
paradigmatic cases, right? So, and this is going to
vary and there'll be some contingency. So, but we,
we can look uh Brian's already gone over some
of these cases, right? In the feudal times, you
have the monarchy. Um AND you of the serfs
um as we move into the industrial times, right?
We have the capitalist class, the remnants of this
feudal society still exerting some influence. And now this
new emerging working class, the proletariat um that have,
that are working for the capitalists. Um We can
roughly identify these, we can identify the paradigmatic cases,
right? The, the uh capitalists are the ones who
own the factories and, and given their relations, given
the current structure, um they're the ones that can
take advantage of this and so they own this
property. They're the ones that can um hire and
fire workers, et cetera. If you are AAA liberated
service, now you can move to the city where
you can where before you had to work for
um a particular monarch, you can now work for
factory owner, a factory owner, b, factory owner C
et cetera. Um But what you, but the position
you're in when you're doing that is you own
really nothing but your own labor power, right? So
you don't have a lot of options. Um These,
these are, these are your options um the aristocracy,
obviously the, the remnants of the aristocracy, so powerful,
remnants of the aristocracy, um they own the land,
so they're essentially working as uh renting out land.
Um Marx is not going to be concerned so
much with, uh in between cases, the sort of
aspiring capitalist who may be acquiring enough money to
consider going into business for themselves. Um He's going
to be interested in the, the paradigmatic cases and
if these can explain the sort of tensions he
sees. So, um it's also important, right? Stepping back
for Mars, it is to not think of society
as a um collaborative endeavor for the mutual benefit
of everybody. He thinks that's uh mythology, what you
have instead, right? Are people who sort of secured
um advantage for themselves and use the, the political
establishment to sort of that um for themselves to,
to enforce that. Um But, but that's roughly the
picture you're going to get. So you're not gonna
get uh a genealogy in every case of how
every, yeah, every class came to be. But, you
know, you can think of the proletariat as the
recently emancipated serfs by and large, et cetera. Um
But that's how the division of sort of who
goes into the process works. Um What you're gonna,
what you're gonna have here though, Mark thinks is
right, rather than um a collaboration, you're gonna have
tension. So the factory owners, given their position are
going to be incentivized. They want to make as
much, they want to take as much advantage of
their position as they can. So they are going
to be incentivized to, uh, decrease, uh, wages where
possible increase working hours, um, where they can, et
cetera. The working class is going to be, uh,
they're gonna have opposite, uh, intention, they're going, they're
going to be trying, fighting where they can with
what resources they have to decrease the, uh the
day, the length of the working day or to
increase wages, et cetera. So it's these sort of
tensions of the classes in competition with one another
that, so that sets this sort of relationship of
conflict in place. Um J
can I interject something because yeah, can you give,
I mean, we do in the book if something
close to necessary and sufficient conditions for what a
class is and I kind of think that's what
Ricardo was after. Yeah. So why don't, why don't
you put that on the table because I think
that would help uh in, in the conversation.
Yeah, I mean, it's so following something like Elster,
um we want to say something like, you know,
a cla you, you're a member of a class
in virtue of given your stake in the means,
you know, your ownership of the means of production.
Um What are you best positioned? How are you
best positioned to sort of maximize what's going on
for you? Right. So if you're a factory worker
again. Right. If you're a factory, how do we
know the factory owners say the factory owners are
the ones that own the factories and can make
best use of their position in the economic structure
by like we were saying before, um, getting as
much labor for as little as they can if
you're a working class person, right? You're, you're approaching
the market that what you need to do to
get by is you need to sell your labor.
You have no other options available. So you're incentivized
on pain of starvation as it were in this
case, right? To go find work at the factory,
whatever, whatever you think of that work. But that's,
that's, that's what your best position to do. If
you're uh um member of the aristocracy who's sort
of losing its, losing its power in the new
industrial revolution, but you still own all the land,
you're gonna be incentivized to rent your land and
make as much from money as you can from
that land. So again, it's, there's going to be
in between cases, but you can see people sort
of sorted in broad categories based on where they
stand in the, in the
particular, on what they own
and particular on what they own, right?
What, what productive they own or control.
Yeah, I would, yeah, fact we might say like
what they effectively control, right? Because um that might
be a better way to put it. Um Yeah,
but then with all of that in mind, with
the square.
Yeah. So class consciousness is for marks, this is
important, right? It's not um it's you, you, you
can be whether you are a member of a
class or not. If you're in a paradigmatic, you
know, you're paradigmatic, a member of a class or
not, is a fact about you, an objective fact
about you, right? Um You may or may not
be cognizant of the, the significance that plays in
the structure, right? You may know, right. I'm, I'm
a worker. I know I have to go work
for a salary to make a living. I know
that part. But you're not thinking about necessarily, you're
not thinking about the role of all the other
workers, et cetera, et cetera. You're not, you're not
stepping back to think about sort of the incentive
structure of the economy as a whole and the
way it's organized and maybe the ways that you're
pitted against et cetera, those sort of things you're,
you're, you're not necessarily conscious of, but Mark says
you can become conscious of. So for instance, he
thought um the the peasants in France were a
class um but did not have class consciousness in
part because they were separated on farms, they weren't
interacting with one another, et cetera, et cetera. So
it's, it was a true fact about them that
they were a member of a class, but they
weren't thinking about it in terms of, they weren't
making aware, conscious to themselves. Hey, I'm a member
of a class. These are my interest, my interests
are in fact pitted against this other group. Perhaps
we should organize, etcetera, etcetera, leverage what we can
to sort of um maximize our benefits. Um
Can I interject just on that? Because, because I
think that touches on the crucial thing, I mean,
to be conscious of your membership in a class
is to be conscious that in virtue of your
position in the economy, right? You have certain interests
and these interests are shared with other people who
are in the same economic position, right? And that's
what class consciousness mean. And this is why they
thought Marx and Engels thought of the Communist Party
as the instrumentality for producing class consciousness for helping
the vast number of laborers in the new industrial
economy. Understand that they had similar economic interests and
that their economic interests were totally opposed to the
economic interests of the factory owners, the capitalists that
they, that they work for. I think that's the
crux of class consciousness is consciousness of what your
shared interests are given your economic position.
So, a and then how does Marx characterize capitalism
and what are perhaps the main positive and negative
aspects of ca capitalism that he identifies?
Ok. Uh I guess I'll try to take that
one to start but Jamie feel free to jump
in. Um OK, so it's very important for Marx
that, you know, capitalism represents a distinctive way of
organizing production in, in a society. OK. Um And
the distinctive feature of capitalism for Marx, um it's
not just that you have people who, you know,
own books. Are you a, are we still there?
Sorry, I, I the screen just disappeared. Did you,
should I start again? Ricardo?
Uh I mean, I didn't miss anything from that
that you said so
sorry, my screen disappeared. Um The, the distinctive feature
of capitalism um is that um he defines it
in terms of an exchange relation. Um You know,
one kind of exchange relation is where, um you
know, uh I um I do some work, all
right. Um In order to buy a commodity, something,
some object that I just wanna use for myself.
OK. Um And the distinctive thing about capitalism is
that the ultimate object of it is not simply
to get something right that I can immediately use,
right? Um You know, to buy a chicken, cook
it and eat it and it's gone, right? The
distinctive feature of capitalism is that capitalists engage in
exchange in order to get more money capital, right?
So the the form of capitalist exchange is either
the capitalist lay out money to buy technology, rent
a factory, rent, land, hire workers produce a commodity
not to be used by me, the capitalist, but
to be sold in order to get more money,
right? That's really the distinctive thing is that the
entire ra zone detro of capitalists is to engage
in production in order to produce more money at
the end, a sub more than what they put
uh in at the, at the start. So he
describes it as, you know, it's m money to
pur purchase commodities to get M prime that is
extra money at the, at the end. All right.
Um Commodities is a term of art from Mars.
Commodity is something that is produced with the intention
of selling it to someone else, right? So it's
not simply production for personal use. Um Commodity production
exists prior to capitalism, but capitalism organizes it in
this very distinctive form where commodity production occurs at
the behest of capitalists who are looking to get
more money as the outcome of that process and
then to start the whole um uh the whole
s uh sequence once again. OK. Now, um why
is capitalism important in the, in the history of
the world? Well, a very sim simple minded way
of putting it would be without capitalism? No communism,
right? Which is why the question is capitalism good
or bad is not a Marx question, right? Without
capitalism, communism is impossible. And we'll return to, to
why that is, it's actually related to the most
positive thing about capitalism, which is Marx thinks that
this incentive structure where you want as a capitalist,
you wanna spend money in order to engage in
a productive process. That will get you more money
out in the end, creates a remarkable incentive for
people to try to develop technology, right? Because think
of the question, how do I get more money
out of the productive process than I put into
it in the first place, right? I have certain
fixed costs, right? I have to pay for labor
power, right? I have to pay for the technology,
the maintenance of it, the acquisition of it. Um
AND so on. Um I can sometimes, you know,
reduce what I pay the workers, right? Which will
increase my profit margin. Um uh SOMETIMES I can
get the workers to work more for the same
wage, right? And so they produce more, that'll increase
my my profit margin. Um But other times I
can invest in technology that will allow the same
workers at the same wage to produce much more
than they could have otherwise. Ok, let me go
back to our power loom example, right? You know,
you could have 100 individual weavers working away in
your faco factory or you could have just five
of them working the power loom and they'll produce
the exact same quantity of goods. OK. This marks
things creates an endless incentive for capitalists to innovate
in technology because that is one of the ways
in which they increase their profit margins and increasing
their profit margin is the point of the whole
exercise. The whole exercise is meant to produce more
money. OK. Um And this is where Marx, you
know, agrees with my colleagues in the Chicago School
of, of economics that capitalism, right? Is it an
extr the most productive, economically productive system in the
history of humanity? Right? Um The problem marks things,
right is that the logic of capitalism is necessarily
going to have a very bad ending. OK. For
the following reason, uh um if capitalists have an
endless incentive to increase productive power through technological innovation,
which they clearly do, all right. Um The effect
of technological innovation is to reduce the need for
human labor power. OK. Um So it displaces certain
human labor power. Marx thinks at the limit, right?
At some point, this capitalist capacity for developing technology
is gonna eliminate almost all need for human labor
power. And that's a big problem if what most
people have to sell is their labor power, right?
If you don't have any buyers, right, you're going
to be in a very bad economic state. But
the irony is, it's also gonna be fatal to
capitalism because capitalism needs buyers, right? I give you
an anecdote that we use in the book, but
it illustrates this very nicely. Um uh The head
of the United Auto Workers Labor Union in the
United States is visiting a Ford Motor plant where
they just installed a bunch of robots to replace
human laborers who work on the assembly line. And
the Ford Motor Company executives says, look at these
robots. And he says to Walter Reuther, the famous
head of the labor and he says, try to
organize these robots, right? You can't, they don't need
a labor union. And Rouer says, try to sell
them your cars. Ok? And that was the, and
that was in a way the essential point Mars
was making is if you displace human labor power
to too great an extent, right? There's gonna be
no one to purchase the commodities you produce. And
at that point, capitalism is over, all right. Capitalism
is over because the whole point of capitalist production
is profit and you can't make profit if you
can't sell the commodities you produce. Right? It's pretty
simple. Ok. And so Marx thinks that this is
the fundamental reason. Now there's other accounts you can
find in Marx. But I think this is the
most plausible of the reasons he identifies why capitalism
is eventually going to come to an end. That
doesn't, by the way mean it's going to be
replaced with communism. This is here when we disagree
with him in the book about this. Um, YOU
know, here the sort of teleological view that necessarily
communism is what replaces capitalism, where communism would mean
using the amazing technology and productive power created by
capitalism to produce things to meet human needs, right?
Rather than to generate profit. And that's certainly one
way it could go, right. The other way it
could go, of course, is that the capitalist class
just uh walls itself off from everyone else, pays
some people for security and produces what it needs
to live very well. Um And you know, Rosa
Luxembourg, a famous Marxist theorist and revolutionary in the
early 20th century said the choice is gonna become
socialism or barbarism, right? Um Socialism would be we
use enormous productive power in order to liberate people
from the need to work, to survive and to
meet their needs and allow them to engage in
free productive activities. Marx puts it, uh the other
alternative would be where, you know, through barbaric force,
those who control productive power, use it for themselves
and let everyone else rot basically. Um And uh
we're gonna have an election next week in the
United States. It's not socialism versus barbarism, but there
is barbarism on one side. We'll see how it
goes. Uh
So, uh let me ask you then because of
course, people use a lot, the word communist and
communist society and of course, particularly now after uh
things like the Soviet Union and Mao's China, we
tend to associate communism with them. But what did
Mars mean by communism or communist society or did
they have much to say about that? And if
so would it, what would it look like,
Jamie? I'm gonna let you take this, you can
talk about the two phases of Yeah. And I
think this is more your daily. Yeah.
Good. I mean, it's So, you know, Marx didn't
invent the term communism, right? So this is part
of he's coming of age, right? In a, in
a time where people are thinking through these ideas.
Um What's so, you know, so people often look
to Marx, right? What is, what exactly is this
vision gonna be et cetera? And it's worth noting
here that he has relatively little to say about
it for somebody who's written so much, right? So,
so most of what we get, especially, you know,
in Capitol is a critique of, of the dynamics
of capital that Brian just went through. Um It's
not a, it's not a program for the future,
what the future is going to look like. Um
We do get some indications though, right? So he
is, so this is so it's important for him
to distinguish him from the sort of utopians that
the utopian socialists that he uh opposed, right? So
their project is going to be one of, of
laying out what the goods of a new society
are going to be, what it could look like,
maybe trying on the margins um to, you know,
develop some s some communities in part to practice
this. Marx was not interested in any of this
and for the reasons Brian said he, so he
thought communism was coming, it was gonna have a
certain form but, but it's, it's going to follow
the natural progression of capitalism disintegrating. OK. Um What
will he he does say things though, programmatically here
and there and suggest certain things through letters, et
cetera. We don't want to put too much on
this. But, but, but he says something. So what
he does say is he thinks that um the,
the, the there will be a revolution. Uh We
don't, we, we it's going to come in the
most advanced countries again for the reasons that historical
materialism predicts um historical materialism, we get the goods
of capitalism. Um But the problem is we have
this mass of the miser people. And so the
solution, Mars Banks is going to be available with
a little consciousness raising will be available to the
working class itself, right? So he's, he's thinking especially
we now have a working class. I think Germany
England of his time, the most advanced industrial classes
uh are countries. Um The workers are now together
in factories. They're, they're organized under the labor process.
There are lots of workers. Um They are increasingly
a miser and aware of this as they're watching.
The fact are increasingly enriched. Um And so they're
able to identify, not only are they a miser,
it, but they're able to identify the source of
their em miration. Um And in the easiest case,
you know, you can just lock the factory owners
out. It's, it's almost something like that. Marx has
in mind in the early days. But you, but,
ok, so you have this class, it's going to
be conscious, Marx is open and this is where
I think he's genuinely not an a priori thinker
like he is, he is attentive to what's unfolding
on the ground. And there are times where he's
early on thinks it's necessarily going to be an
armed revolution. Um COMING out of the 1848 days.
Uh This is obviously in the air after some
time in England, he thinks it's possible that the
working class could leverage uh the the ballot in
order to take control. Um But he does think
there's there's problem and now we're just getting into
him sort of predicting not saying with determination what's
gonna happen. He thinks it probably will be an
armed conflict at some point or other either to
take control um through armed conflict or if the
proletariat take it through the ballot, he expects there
will be a reaction from the factory owner. So
at some point, there will probably be an armed
insurrection or backlash uh from the, from the factory
owners. And so it's at this point, we, this
is where Marx is now suggesting two things. So
we get this sort of first phase of communism
again, just as a suggestion, not as a program,
uh first phase of communism and then uh what
he calls the higher form. So at the first
phase, he suggests that there will be a dictatorship
of the polar, which is a scary term for
uh many of us. Now having lived through the
20th century. But it's important for Marx uh uh
uh dictatorship didn't mean what it's come to me.
Now, he thought it would be a temporary phase
in which the working class sees power, make sure
that they can kind of keep down any reactionary
uprisings, et cetera, et cetera in this early phase.
Marx thinks there will be sort of an, an
economic principle that will be. He does, you know,
again, he's just venturing here, but he thinks something
like a coupon system or something, he thinks the
old capitalist system will still be sort of uh
have a little afterlife and people will expect to
get what put, get back what they put in
or something like this. Um But he thinks this
will transition, how quickly this will transition. He doesn't
say he's quite, um but he thinks this will
transition economically again as the, as the, the uh
richness of the economy that capitalism made possible is
really harnessed. It will be, it will come a
point when the principle of justice, Mark says is
uh you know, uh each according to his needs.
Um So it's, it's not going. So, Mark thinks
there'll be uh an abundance there. And at this
moment, he suggests that something like the political state
will wither away what that means. It remains a
bit vague. Um A bit vague, a lot vague.
Um But it's something like, you know, Marx clearly
has this view of politics as the way that
a dominant class harnesses uh economic or harnesses political
power to sort of subjugate. Um The underclasses Marx
thinks in this revolution, there will be no underclasses.
And so at
least
this sort of pejorative role the state plays um
of, of favoring, of being an unfair referee is
going to wither away. Um But that, that's sort
of the, that's as much as we're really given
of what the communist, the uh life is going
to be. And, and this is just consistent, I
mean, this can be frustrating for uh people reading
Marx, but this is very consistent with historical materialism.
He thinks that uh our ideas, the things we
value, the possible things we consider. All of these
things are follow from the sort of material conditions
that are available and, and when we're thinking about
a communist society, we're thinking about a transformation of
the material conditions. So what direction that's going to
take? Mark thinks will just is a, is a
historical matter to be determined.
Let me, let me follow up on this, Ricardo,
if I might just put this in, just make
this very concrete, right. Um You know, it's, it's,
it's often objected to Marx to say, well, people
are basically self-interest, right. Marx doesn't deny that by
the way. All right. Um uh YOU know, but
uh at least the way in which people are
self interested now is presumably partly a function of
the circumstances under which they live. Right. Um, SO
think of it this way, suppose we did not
live in a society or an economy, right? Um,
IN which you had to devote most of your
life to activity simply in order to earn a
wage. Right. Suppose it was a society with productive
abundance and, and we are of the view, I'm
definitely the view, but I think Jamie is too
that, uh, on, on Marx's view, productive abundance is
a necessary condition for any alternative, any humane alternative
to, to capitalism, which is why um Mao should
not have been a communist. Why Lenin sort of
understood this, but then circumstances over overtook him. Um
YOU know, Russia and China were agricultural societies. They
had no business pretending to be communist. Um And
you know, so productive abundance is required. Suppose we
have productive abundance, suppose productive abundance is used to
liberate people from uh the struggle to survive, right?
So that Ricardo, you are free to produce the
dissenter. You don't have to worry about paying the
bills or the rent, right? And Jamie and I
are free to teach what we want to teach
or write, right? And other people are free to
engage in other activities that are meaningful and, and
satisfying to them. Um If we aren't locked in
a constant struggle for survival, it's quite possible our
motives and our values might be very different. Indeed,
it seems somewhat likely. Um YOU know, just as
you find within a functional family. Um, YOU know,
people don't act on the basis of self-interest all
the time. Why not? Well, because they aren't locked
in a struggle for survival with each other. So,
too, if it could be, if it could be
replicated at a, at a society wide level, one
might expect that people's motivations will be, will be
quite different. Um, AND I do think that is
part of Marx's picture and it's why as Jamie
was saying, he doesn't want to write the cookbooks
for the chefs in the future. Uh That's his
famous metaphor for this. Um Some of this will
emerge under new material and economic conditions, right? That
being said, I think it's fair to say that
the word communism has been so damaged by the
tyrants of the 20th century that Marx needs a
new word to describe this kind of humane way
of organizing social production. Um Because there's just no
way around the fact that, you know, between Stalin
and Mao, you know, and, and the tyrants in
East Europe, you know, Ceausescu and so on, right?
Communism is damaged goods as a, as a concept.
So we need a different concept to describe circumstances
where immense productive power is used in order to
free people to engage in the kind of activities
they want to engage in rather than giving over
their lives to work. They would rather not do
if given the choice, which is the lives of
most people. Right. I mean, there's just no way,
uh, around that. Um, AND of course it's never
discussed, you know, in, uh, in democracies that way.
But that is the reality that Marx is very
alert to that people spend their entire lives coerced
in effect by the marketplace to do things they
probably really don't want to do but they have
to do on pain of, you know, I miration,
starvation and so on.
So, but the sort of related to that Marx
was also interested in what constitutes a good life
for humans. And uh uh before we get into
the good life itself, let me ask you because
this is very interesting to me because there are
many people out there who I hear accusing Mars
of denying human nature of being an extreme environment,
environmentalist, so to speak when it comes to psychology,
sociology, for example. Uh So did they recognize any
kind of human nature?
Yeah. So the answer to that is quite clearly,
yes. Um uh You know, now I think the
I I think the critics, you, you allude to
who, you know, I mean, the most famous, right?
I mean, Steven Pinker, right? Says some people think
that human beings are a blank slate and mark
certainly didn't think they were a blank slate. Um
What he does think is that some attributes that
are said to be features of human nature are
often artifacts of particular socio-economic forms of organization. That
was my point about the example of the ex
you know, the rational man of economics, right is
always instrumentally rational in trying to get what he
wants. OK. And under capitalism, that's exactly how you
better be or you'll be destroyed. OK. Does that
mean that people by nature are that way or
that people act that way under circumstances where that's
the condition of economic survival, so that Marx is
quite skeptical about, right? And I think you've got
to be skeptical about uh about that. On the
other hand, he has a very substantive view about
human nature. Um He articulates it primarily uh explicitly
in his early work of the 1844 period. Um
BUT some of the ideas remain in the background
all the way into the mature Marx. He ST
he kind of stopped writing about it. He loses
interest in it in part because of one of
his differences with the, with the left young Gallian
Jamie talked about earlier, which is, he doesn't think
moral exhortation is gonna change anything. All right, societies
don't change because you give a good sermon, right?
Um Societies change when the material circumstances are right
for them to change. And then you need to
appeal to the self-interest of the largest economic class.
Um THAT'S where class consciousness comes in, you know,
but in the early writings, he, he spells this
out, right? So one of the things he thinks
and this is the the core to his view.
And it's a view that he shares with Hegel.
He shares with uh many of the ancient Greek
philosophers, especially Aristotle um is the idea that um
for human beings to lead a good life, right,
to flourish, as we often say, is for them
to realize their essential nature. OK. So right there,
if that's the case, then you gotta know what
is their essential nature. And Marx thinks the essential
nature of human beings is that they want to
engage in productive activity, right? That it is not
in the nature of human beings to lie on
the sofa all day and watch television. OK. Um
uh That doesn't mean there may not be some
people like that and it certainly doesn't deny that
people who are ground down by, you know, a
life in the capitalist marketplace may have energy for
nothing else but lying on the sofa at the
end of the day. Um But Marx doesn't think
that's what people are essentially like he says, he
thinks people essentially want to produce, right? And in
particular, he thinks and, and this is really the
most striking claim, I think that you find in
Marx and that survives into the late Marx as
well is that human beings not only want to
produce, but they like to produce things for aesthetic
reasons because they are aesthetically satisfying because they're beautiful
because they're pleasing. Um And you know, uh two
interesting facts that I think, you know, speak to
this. One is that we know that throughout the
history of humankind, human beings have engaged in productive
activity have made things simply because they were beautiful,
even under the most difficult material circumstances, right? People
did this human beings, right? Cave drawings, right? I
mean, where you find human beings, they make certain
things for aesthetic reasons, right? Their aesthetic taste may
be very different but they make them because they're
pleasing, they're beautiful, they're satisfying in a different way.
Uh The other fact that I think is very
telling about this is the way we educate Children.
So when Children first go to school, you know,
at the age of four or five or six,
there's always a lot of time given to them
for artwork, right? And here's the thing about art
work time, you don't have to force Children to
do it. Nobody has to say if you don't
do it, you won't get your snack, they like
it, they just Children instinctively, they like coloring, making
things with clay. It's very appealing to them, right?
Um This too suggests that he's on to something
very important about human beings, that human beings really
have a very profound need to produce things for
uh reasons of aesthetic satisfaction. OK. Um You know,
now in the early Mars, he makes other claims
about what uh the essential needs of, of human
beings are. Um YOU know, so he, he's got,
it's a more complicated picture. But I think the
the two crucial ideas that I think he always
holds through is that human beings are by nature
productive and that they like to produce things for
aesthetic reasons, right? And Marx thinks this is the
big difference between human beings and other animals, right?
Is that other animals produce strictly for need. Whereas
human beings, if given the chance will produce for
aesthetic reasons. So it's a very, it's a pretty
rich, it's a, it's a robust picture of what
human beings are essentially. Like that being said, I
will say that I do think Marx um is
probably a bit naive about um other aspects of
human beings. Um You know, this was, this is
sort of the big dividing line between Marxists and
Freudians, right? I mean, Freud thought that human beings,
you know, were instinctively aggressive and he didn't think
it was just an artifact of the way society
was organized and, you know, my own inclination is
to think that unfortunately, Freud is probably more right
than Marx when it comes to this. Um But
it's wrong to say Marx doesn't have a view
of human nature. He clearly does
so religious uh related to that. And again, this
occurs in the context of capitalism according to Marx,
a very Marxian term as well as alienation. So
what is alienation and how the alienation occur?
Ok. So the right. So the early Marx is
very interested in the concept of alienation and fremd,
which is a estrangement. Sometimes in English, it's translated
as uh a strange um to be alienated is
to be alienated from your essential nature. That's what
alienation is, right? So if you cannot express or
realize your essential nature, right? Um THEN you are
in a state of alienation under capitalism, most people
engage in productive activity not to express their essential
nature, but to uh survive. In that sense, people
are always alienated under capitalism because their productive activity
doesn't really belong to them. I mean, literally, it's
owned by the capitalist who's ever paying, you know,
their, their wage, what they produce is owned by
the capitalist. It's not even theirs, right? And their
productive activity itself is not productive activity they would
engage in if they didn't need the wage to
survive, right? So, in that sense, people are profoundly
alienated under, under capitalism and notice that in that
way of characterizing alienation and, and there's more we
could say about it, which we do discuss in
chapter six of the book. But in that way
of characterizing alienation, alienation is not primarily a matter
of how you feel. All right, that is people
can be alienated from their essential nature and feel
perfectly fine about it, right? Um That is until
they acquire class consciousness and they realize that they're
spending their whole life doing things they would rather
not do except they have to in order in
order to survive. Um But that's the basic idea
of uh of alienation. And again, it's very tightly
connected to his notion of human nature.
So go going back a little bit, I would
like to ask you now about uh Marx's ideas
about ideology. So uh going back for a second
to historical materialism, how do material conditions lead to
differences in ideas, culture values, basically what Ma Marx
called the super structure?
Mhm You wanna take that, Jim? Yeah, sure.
Um Good. Um Right. So it's a bit of
a thorny issue obviously, but I, but what we
have going on, I mean, just to, to tie
it very closely to the historical materialism account, right?
Mars has the idea that um in those cases,
then there could be
um Right. So in those cases, you're, you're going
to have in the case, think of the monarchy
or something, right? You have this feudal regime um
they, they own the land, they've, they have, they
have the land and they're going to
let me say something quick while Jamie solves the
feedback problem and then I give it back to
Jamie. I mean, the the basic idea is that
the dominant moral, political, philosophical, religious, economic ideas in
any society are the ones that serve the interests
of the dominant class in that society. Right? That's
the basic idea and that's where I'm sure JB
was going with that example. So now JB, hopefully
you're done. Echoing. Yeah. OK. Your example. All right,
we'll see. Um Right. So, so just like Brand
said, right? So you're, you're gonna have um so
in, in the times of feudalism, you're going to
now have a set of ideas that are going
to be the, the ideas that get traction and
culture. And Marx predicts with what you're going to
get are going to be ideas that reinforce um
this, this status quo and that this is what
you get. So, right, if you look at in
the times of feudalism, you're going to have in
the ch you're gonna go to the church and
the church is going to tell you um be
good and um your reward will be in heaven.
And what you need to do right now is
to recognize that the, the king or the queen
is God's representative on earth, et cetera, et cetera.
Um You're going to have the music of the
time, the painting of the time are going to
be in some sense, not on purpose, propaganda, but
so steeped in this culture that they're going to
be reproducing it in some ways, right? So there'll
be odes to the greatness of the king and
the queen and, and et cetera, et cetera. Um
And then when we switch to capitalism, those that
will disappear and you're going to instead have ideas
about the valor of rather than knowing your place
in the universe, there will be ideas about um
being free where Marx is gonna think this means
you're free to leave the land to go work
for the factory owners. But these kind of this
valor of the new ideal as opposed to the
old ideal. But so, so that's, that's in the
sense that ideology is tied to the material conditions,
right? It's the material conditions are sort of generating
um a a situation that are then that's then
expressed in the culture of the times. Um uh
That's how it's tied to the material conditions. But,
but the idea itself, right is, is more complicated
than that a bit in Marx. So, right, so
in Marx, we get um he again, he doesn't
quite come out and identi uh uh define the
term uh but he uses it frequently. So uh
the the chore is to sort of see what
the common, what, what's common throughout his various uses
of the term. Uh What we suggest is that
throughout the various uses, um there's a core component
for ideology, there's an epistemic comp component, namely uh
ideologies or uh complexes of beliefs. But importantly, some
of the beliefs are going to be false for
mark. So not all of not all, not every
component will be false, but importantly, you'll be able
to look at an ideological belief and there will
be a, there will be a, a room for
epistemic critique. You can say this is false, this
is not true about uh you know the nature
of humans or the nature of this particular economic
situation or et cetera, et cetera. OK. Um That's
one component. Um Marx is very interested though, not
just in saying that the views of his opponents
are false, but he thinks it's an important thing
to understand how they came to be false. And
this will be very important for Marx because he,
he accuses wide swaths of the community to be
um in the grips of ideological belief, right? So,
so for instance, the Economic Department, the theology department,
the et cetera. So the question is going to
be for Marx, he, he wants to say a
lot of these beliefs are, are false. Core aspects
of these beliefs are false and not just accidentally.
So, but systematically. So even people working sort of
uh in enclave separate from one another, he thinks
theorizing in a particular time are going to come
to, to make the same sorts of mistakes. So
it's epistemic false. Um There's going to be some
account of the genesis of these beliefs, how it
could be, that they came to be false and
there's going to be a functional component in all
of the cases. It's going to be the case
that these beliefs are false. We can explain their
genesis, but they also serve to promote or at
least sustain the interests of the ruling class who
have um who have monopolized political power. Um So
that's the rough schema in the early days, we
get this very early with Marx when he is
first becoming critical of the young he gleans. Um,
AGAIN, his remarks are scathing. Um, IT'S important to
remember they were a big influence and they included
his teachers, et cetera. Um, BUT he thinks he
thinks that the mistake that they're making is that
they're imagining again, echoing things we've talked about already.
They're imagining that ideas. This is what they, they
take over from Hegel that Marx wants to reject.
They think that ideas are, are really where the
action is. If you wanna understand transformation over history,
you understand ideas. If you yourself want to transform
history, you want to make sure people get their
conceptions, right? They think about themselves the right way,
et cetera, et cetera. Um Marx rejects this for
in favor of the historical materialism that we've outlined
that he's putting forward and he calls this in
the early days their ideology. It's, it's a pejorative
sense in their, their belief that ideas are really
the um the mechanism of history and which he
thinks is false. Um And he has an account
of how they came to have this belief. But
he thinks this functions, even though, right, we, as
we said earlier, people like Bauer were um uh
exiled from the academic community. They, the young heals
are imagining themselves to be uh revolutionary. But Marx
thinks despite what they think, despite their self understanding,
they're mistaken because the ideas they're proposing are are
so far afi from actually understanding how historical materialism
works and a true understanding of class consciousness that
even though they think they're being revolutionary, they're in
fact just bolstering the status quo. Um So this
is in the early days and, and this is
gonna be a very particular, we, we detail this
in the book. It's a very particular kind of
critique of sort of the idealism of The Young
Galions. Um But Marx employs this uh more liberally
in his later years, he's less interested in, I
mean, he continues to do this, but he doesn't
exclusively critique people's philosophical views, um their ideological views,
but he uses it in the, in the sense
that we've kind of come to now um use
the term ideology as sort of a still a
pejorative um uh view, but a, a pejorative belief
um view about a whole host of beliefs people
have but still in the spirit of status quo,
justifying beliefs, the beliefs about economic system, the beliefs
about religious system, the beliefs about a certain moralizing
systems, et cetera. Um THAT they're, they're still in
the service of um bolstering the, the um prevailing
economic interests.
So now for the last part of our conversation,
I would like to ask you a little bit
about Marx's legacy and the influence in some of
the developments in Marxism that we saw throughout the
20th century particularly. So, h how do writers like
Ramsy and the, the ones who were part of
the Frankfurt School relate to Marxism.
Yeah. Good. I mean, I, you know, last to
say here and Brian obviously jump in and I
think there's, I think it's good to think of.
There's two movements, there's a movement, say before um
Western Marxism itself, that's important, which is, you know,
after Marx's death, um angles takes up the mantle
and people following angles for a while you um
uh it's really important to them that Marxism becomes
um s what they think of as scientific. Um
And so you get this um almost this very
orthodox reading of Marx where everything is a completely
reduced to science and um it's predictive all the
way down, et cetera, et cetera. Um So this
is sort of a movement that goes more in
the science trying to make Marxism more of like
a objective science uh on the model of science.
Um
Can I just interject something about that? Yeah, the
last thing you said is, is important on that.
Um Marx himself understood his theory to be a
scientific theory, they'll understand, right? A Wissen like theory
in German is not necessarily a natural scientific theory.
Uh THAT doesn't have to be uh physical science,
all right. Um uh But he certainly thought he
was, you know, had unlocked the secret of historical
change and he, you know, was explaining how capitalism
works. I mean, so he thought his theory was
a scientific theory in that German sense of a,
of a scientific um theory. So what, what I
think is distinctive and and was probably a bit
was the effort by angles but then those especially
influenced by angles um to make it into the
science of dialectical materialism, right? Um That explains everything,
including the physical sciences with Marx. And Marx himself
always exempted the physical sciences from his attacks on
ideology and, and so on, right? But it, but
it is important to realize that Marx thought his
theory was a scientific theory. So that wasn't wrong.
That was actually correct. It was the particular direction
in which they, in which they took it. So
that's just what I wanted to interject. Yeah,
that's right. And that think about that's important, right?
So, um so with that, um what you have
just historically, right is uh actually by world war
one, there was a, a large socialist um political
movement in Europe. Um THAT'S completely fractured during the
first World War. Um PEOPLE working classes of the
world did not unite, they retrenched back into their
um nationalist enclaves. Um And the revolutionary spirit seemed
to have failed after World War one, you, you
get what you have in the, the Soviet Union
with Lenin. But as Brian's already alluded to um
most people in the West thought, no, this is,
this is uh not what Marx was predicting, et
cetera, et cetera. And then you increasingly see now
into the thirties and the forties. Um THE not
only the failed, sort of the working class, failing
to rise up, but the working class seeming to
buy in, in various ways to the, to the
system. And so there's a, there's a movement of
sort of a birth of what's called Western Marxism.
It's um a, a loose um collection of thinkers,
not all of them who saw themselves this way.
But um but trying to theorize Marxism, given what
they took to be the, its failure to predict
um the working class revolution. So they then turned
in various ways. But you mentioned Gramsci before Gramsci
of Lukash, the Frankfurt School in various ways, uh
their interests turned to ideology but is ideology, not
just a sort of this um limited causal thing
that can maintain the status quo um for a
while, but be seen through uh instead it becomes
in the project becomes increasingly one of understanding, why
did the revolution fail? It seems like it's only
into something about the thinking, the indoctrination of the
working class. Um MAYBE even the thinking, the indoctrination
of, you know, capitalism more generally. And so you,
you get this move to thinking um moving away
from Marx's economics, moving away from historical materialism in,
in ways um thinking that is a failed project.
And now thinking all the action is really in
the ideological realm and that's what we need to
understand. Um And so here, you also get, you
know, and the thinking goes in various ways, but
you get a return to heal is because again,
the focus on is on ideas in a way
that it seems like that's where all the action
is. And so in various ways, these thinkers, I
think Brian and I agree that they, this is
one of their failings as they uh too quickly
think the revolution Marx predicted is going to fail
and too quickly abandon the economic aspects of the
theory. Um Focusing on this, the sort of the
men here.
Yeah, let me uh just add a few complimentary
remarks to what Jamie said. I'm gonna put it
a little more strongly. I mean, I do think
Western Marxism is predicated on a mistake um from
a Marxist point of view, um which isn't to
say there aren't interesting ideas and people like Kheer
and Adorno and Marcus and Ramsey and um and
some of the, I'm not sure they're interesting ideas
in Lukash, but that's a different matter. Um But
um the mistake was that they thought they needed
to explain why revolutions had not occurred. Mhm And
yet it was absolutely clear that the material conditions
for revolutions to be possible. Marx's actual prediction didn't
actually obtain. He thought capitalism had to be global.
He thought that the uh those who sell their
labor power to survive had to be, you know,
being gradually miser. OK? And none of this was
happening in 19th century Europe, right? One thing Marx
did not fully anticipate. Uh Well, I mean, we
discussed this in chapter three. He, he started to
become aware of it um as his career went
on, but he didn't fully anticipate the extent to
which the capitalist state would negotiate peace between the
classes, right? By, for example, making concessions to labor
movements. Right, Marx, I didn't fully foresee that. Um
BUT we didn't have global capitalism in 1925 or
1935. Capitalism is much more global. Now, some of
the trends that Marx thought um would result from
global capitalism, we're actually seeing in the wealthy capitalist
countries, right? This is part of the Trump phenomenon
is that, you know, there's a huge section of
the working class whose lives have gotten worse over
the last 30 or 40 years. Historically, when the
technology, new technologies would have um you know, would
displace labor, human labor from one sector, but move
it into another sector, right? You know, um when
uh when the automobile, you know, put um put
the guys who make horseshoes out of business, they
went and worked in the auto factory, right? But
what economists even neoclassical economists have been documenting is
that in the beginning of the 21st century, there
are fewer of these replacement effects that is technology
is still displacing labor, but the labor isn't getting
replaced, you know, shifted over to another part of
the, the economy, you know, um you know, if
I were making predictions and I'm no good at
and there's no reason people should take my predictions
at all seriously. But I'd say we've got another
100 years to go on capitalism before we get
to something closer to the situation. Marx is talking
about and it may be more than that. Right.
And there's huge parts of the globe that haven't
been fully incorporated in the capitalist uh capitalist market.
So that was the basic mistake was to think
that there was a reason that there was something
to be explained that required a new explanatory tool,
namely ideology, the other development. And this is the
one Lukas is responsible for, which is why I
think his influence is so pernicious was Lukas had
a very hegelian reading of Marx Lukas was basically
the return of the left young hegelian that Marx
ridiculed in Haiti, right? Um And that then had
a spillover effect in lots of aspects of Western
Marxism, even with theorists in the Frankfurt School who
weren't especially, you know, devoted to Lukas still retained.
Um YOU know, took over many of his ideas
about the relevance of the hegelian reading of, of
Marx. Um So our book in a way is
an attempt to restate um uh a more orthodox
view of Marx, though not orthodox in, in the,
in the Ham fisted angle, Soviet Union way, right?
No science of dialectical materialism from us. There is
no science of dialectical materialism. Um So I'll stop
there.
OK. Uh uh So I would really love to
have time to go through all the major developments
in Marxism across the past century. But since we
have limited time, let me just ask you a
couple of more questions before we wrap up the
interview. So uh there are now extinctions of Marxism.
I think we could call them that like feminist
Marxism. So earlier, we talked about a class. Do
you think that Marx would have been open to
ideas like intersectionality or expanding the array of social
identities or of ca or categories by which people
can be oppressed beyond just class?
Yeah. Good. I mean, this is a good question.
Brian obviously jump in here too for Marx, what
is going to be important, right? The different Marxists
who could answer this question differently. Um But I
I think what's going to be uncontroversial for Marx
is class matters at the end of the day.
Um So you, so you might have cases, right?
Where there are various moves that can be made
within the prevailing system, there might be groups that
are more dominated than others, you know, within the
present system that seems clear. Um And there could
be some progress made, say within, you know, um
a a group that stigmatized, destigmatize them or, or
things like this right then and that all seems
to the good. Um But it's gonna be limited
this is what's gonna be crucial for Marx. All
of these moves are gonna be moves. You have
a society that is fundamentally hierarchical and where the,
the economic ruling class is taking advantage, exploiting the,
the rest. Right? And so the, the rest again
there, there, you know, you can fight over the
crumbs in various ways. But I think that's how
Marx is gonna see it. It's gonna be crumb
fighting and you, you know, and it's not to
dismiss all of that. But it's just to say
that for Marx, any of these changes are going
to be just changes within, say, you know, it's
unjust, say within a prevailing system, you might think
it's unjust that um certain demographics are on the
bottom and certain demographics are on the top and
that, that may seem, right? But for Marx, what's
going to be more fundamental is, is that presupposing
that whole background, which is that it's hierarchical in
the first place so you can move around the
positions and Marx thinks there's still going to be
in a fundamentally um exploitative situation. As long as
you have the rulers and the rule, it doesn't
matter who's wearing the various hats, right? So, so,
um so at, at a minimum, I think Marx
is gonna say, um it's what really matters is,
is undoing this fundamental hierarchical structure where there's the
haves and the have nots um stronger marks. Um
I, you know, could, would, would also say things
like um these other fights might be a distraction.
This is where things will get controversial. But, you
know, I think for Marx, he would say it's
not that certain um political movements say are yeah,
wrong or it wouldn't be good if they had
their ends realized or something but focusing exclusively on
certain aspects, um frustrates others. So let me give
an example, just an example that comes to mind
if recently that I think sort of illustrates this.
Um THIS is owing to a friend of mine.
Um SHE um gave me this example but she
uh works in the child welfare system and long
story short, you know, a couple of years ago
in Illinois, same legislative sessions where they're decreasing funding
for kids in um the system who don't have
parents, they pass a bipartisan bill that changes what
you call kids in the system from wards of
the state, which sounds like a prisoner. So it
sounds like a dignitary harm to youth in care.
And uh that was enacted into law and the
both the right and the left went home and
patted themselves on the back on this amazing thing
they had done for the kids changed what they
were called. Um Does it, is it bad that
you change what a kid is called? No, it's
not bad. You change what a kid is called?
Does it change? Does it transform their life in
a meaningful way? No. And it and it's ridiculous
to think it does and to the extent that
you think, to the extent that one thinks so.
Right. It's taking, it's distracting attention away from the
real needs that are happening. Um JUST as a
footnote. Um I uh teach classes in prison and
in Wisconsin, they have just switched from um calling
prisoners inmates to persons in our care and that's
now become official even as, and it remains largely
like a dungeon um series of dungeons up there.
So I think it's this kind of thing that's
going to animate sort of Marxist thinking here. It's
not that it's, you know, it's not that we
should be fighting over the crumbs. And it's not
to say, you know, that's all misguided or something.
But I think for Marx, there's a profoundly hierarchical,
economically structured system and until you have some, until
you amend that in some way, everything else is
just um gonna be kind of a losing battle.
But
let me just add 11 thing to that if
I might, I, I mean, I agree with everything
Jamie said. And the example is certainly an apt
example of utterly meaningless symbolic identity politics as it
were. Um But, you know, the, the starker form
of the question that uh Ricardo, your initial question
suggested to me is, um you know, is there
still gonna be sexism in a communist society, right?
Um And this is a question, a lot of
feminist Marxists are, are worried about. Um, AND, you
know, it's a hard question to answer. Mark certainly
seems to write as if, um, features of sexism
in the family that he did notice were artifacts
of capitalism. Um, WOULD there cease to be any
sexism in a classless society where people weren't locked
in a struggle for survival? I'm a little more
skeptical and I think this turns on the question
of what we think the ultimate roots of sexism
are. Um I don't actually think there would be
any racism in a class of society because I
do think racial prejudice is entirely an artifact of
class conflict. Um Sexism, I'm less optimistic about unfortunately
because um you know, it may well be that
the, the conflict between male and female um even
when you take the market out of it, um
is still going to result in various kinds of
discrimination and oppression specific to sex and, and gender
and even in the absence of economic class. But
that's just my speculation. Um And I do think
it's something that feminist Marxists are correctly worried about.
Um So just wanted to add that. Mhm.
So my last question will be then what aspects
of Marxism are still worth considering and are worthy
intellectual pursuits in your review?
Well, do, shall I start on that one? Jem.
Um Well, as I mentioned earlier, right? Um Marx's
theory of historical change has been very fruitful in
history as a way of understanding historical events. And
I'm sure historians will continue to draw on aspects
of class conflict and class analysis as a way
of understanding um historical events. Um I think the
Marxist theory of ideology is quite important. Um I
think the role of ideology in contemporary societies is
really quite extraordinary in terms of what just doesn't
get discussed, right? What is just assumed to be
off the, off the table? Um And the only
explanation I think there is for that is that
there are shared ideologies that inevitably turn out to
be advantageous to the dominant economic classes in that
society. So I think there's still a lot of
uh room for for work on that. Um I
think Marx's basic diagnosis of, you know, why capitalism
is going to go awry is correct. I think
other aspects of Marxist economics we didn't talk about
like the labor theory of value are just mistaken.
Um I think there's a lot of time wasted
on trying to salvage it, right? People start treating
capital like the Talmud, right? And they want to
parse every little sentence. And so I'm not sure
that's a productive use of intellectual um time. Um
I do think there's a lot of work to
be done and a lot of uh theorists inspired
by Marx are doing it in thinking about how
the concept of class needs to be modified in
light of points Jamie made earlier, which is that
um you know, the the categories are, they're more
mixed now than they were then, right? So a
lot of Marxist theorists talk about the profe professional
managerial class as somewhere intermediate between the proletariat, you
know, um and the traditional capitalist class, right? That
is these are the highly educated people who largely
work in the service of the capitalist class, but
are still as it were selling their labor power,
but perhaps they're selling it for a lot of
money. Right? So their situation is a bit different
than the, uh you know, the people working in
the Amazon warehouse, you know, um who are getting
the minimum wage. So I think there's important work
that's being done there and that, that needs to
be done. Those, those are a few. I would
single out. I don't know if Jamie wants to
add to that.
No, II, I would agree with that list. I
think, I think those are the, you know, as
far as the substantial ideas of Marx. Those strike
me as important. I mean, it does seem like
we're, we remain in crisis, right? And so, um
I, I think that Marx offers insights along, you
know, along the content, Brian offered. Marx is also
just fun to read. Um So I would encourage
if people haven't read, I mean, I, I don't
think you should start with capital. It's um a
bit tricky but um, but Marx is, is good
to read to think through because he what you,
when you really right. If you just read his
followers, he seems like a religious figure. But when
you read Marx himself, you, you, it's an exciting
live mind who is responding in real time to
events unfolding around him critically but trying to bring
all the resources he can to bear on these
issues thinking through them in real time. So even
if you disagree with certain, you know, of his
conclusions, he's an exciting person to read and think
along with a bit contagious
in
that way.
He's funny. He's not boring. Like most academic Marxist
are, he's very funny. He's rude. Uh, HE, he
hates certain people and he has great fun with
them. Um, AND, you know, so he really is
enjoyable to read. I think that's right. I wouldn't
start, I mean, there are parts of capital that
are like that too, but I would agree. I
wouldn't, I wouldn't start there. I would even start
with the Communist Manifesto. But, you know, um, he's,
uh, he's, he's a lot more fun to read
than most Marxists I think. I think that was
well said by Jamie. Um, AND he should definitely
not be treated like a religious figure and we
certainly don't do that in the book because we
think there are a lot of things like the
labor theory of value, um, that were as it
were failed intellectual, uh, undertakings that, uh, but that
much of Marx survives without it. Mhm
Yes. Uh And of course, if people do not
want to start directly with Marxist writings, they have
this wonderful introductory text we've been talking about. So
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
down below and Doctor Weber and, and Edwards. Uh
JUST before we go, where can people find your
work on the internet?
OK. So, um you know, so I have a
page at S SRN Social Science Research Network. So
you Google, my name and S Srn you will
find lots of papers of mine that you can
download um for, for free. Um And uh and
you can also find my various musings on my
blog, some philosophical, some political called Lighter Reports. Um
And I have a website you can Google me
and uh and it will come up and, and
anybody who wants to reach out, uh please feel
free to do so, too happy to continue this
conversation.
Ok, great. So, Doctor Later, Doctor Edwards, thank you
so much for doing this. It's been a wonderful
and very informative conversation. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you Ricardo. Thank you for your
whole series.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show. On
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer,
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi,
Nale Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and YPJ
Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franka La Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftdw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio,
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter. Oin David Williams, the
Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica,
a week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von
Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dae Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers. These our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Benedikt Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Ser Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.